# Theoretical Background

## Platform-based Open Source Software Ecosystems

With modern software systems changing from a monolithic to a platform-based
design [@Hanseth2010], software is created “on top” of digital platforms, that
is the “extensible codebase of a software-based system that provides core
functionality shared by the modules that interoperate with it and the interfaces
through which they interoperate” [@Tiwana2010b, 675]. When the platform
orchestrator opens the digital platform for third-party developers, it
transitions to a software ecosystem [@Bosch2009], which consists of the digital
platform, its interfaces, complementary modules, and the developers
[@Tiwana2013]. In software ecosystems, developers contribute their time,
knowledge, and skill to increase the value of the ecosystem by participating in
it through the contribution of modules [@Roberts2006], which are “add-on
software subsystem that connect to the platform to add functionality to the
platform” [@Tiwana2010b, 676]. In this scenario, the platform functions as a hub
with the complementary modules as spokes connected through application
programming interfaces (APIs) or other technical standards [@Jacobides2018].
This transformation is also evident in OSS, where the resulting platform-based
open source software “incorporate principles from open source development as
well as traditional engineering principles (e.g. modular system design)”
[@Cataldo2010, 66]. Accordingly, we define _platform-based open source software
ecosystems (POSSE)_ as “a collection of digital artifacts [i.e., modules] that
coevolve through mutual interference, and the social actors related to these
artifacts that are linked by a common interest” [@Eck2016, 2].

The modular system design affords coordinating large numbers of developers that
contribute interdependent modules through an ecosystem [@Jacobides2018] in which
interoperability with the platform core is ensured through the usage of the
platform’s interfaces [@Tiwana2015]. Therefore, POSSE involve “a large and
heterogeneous collection of stakeholders that need to collaborate effectively in
order to produce successful outcomes” [@Cataldo2010, 65]. Hence, they strongly
depend on the contributions of a number of third-party developers that build
complementary modules, which add functionality to the digital ecosystem. By
enabling contributions by external actors, digital ecosystems are seen as a
growing source of innovation where capabilities shift to the outside of the
organization [@Parker2017; @Yoo2013; @Yoo2010a]. This opens up POSSE for
contributions from a wide range of developers and therefore raises the
importance of understanding the dynamics between the social and technical
aspects of the ecosystem.

## Socio-Technical Dynamics in Platform-based Open Source Ecosystems

OSS projects rely heavily on the communities surrounding these projects –
without the contributions of time and effort of highly motivated developers, OSS
projects cannot exist [@Roberts2006]. In general, the success of the open source
model has led to an increase in OSS projects and new ideas on how innovation
should be managed [@Singh2011]. OSS projects do not always produce software
targeted at end users, but at developers and this software is “designed to be
reused and to provide functionality to other software projects” [@Haefliger2008,
180]. @Boland2007 make the point that technology (e.g., software) per se does
not herald innovation in complex networks. Rather, diverse groups of actors with
access to the technology are those putting their capabilities to innovative
uses. In the context of OSS, voluntary software developers form project teams
that emerge based on the developers’ social networks [@Hahn2008]. The success of
OSS projects therefore is not only related to technical characteristics, but
also to “the project production process and the broader social environment in
which developers work” [@Singh2011, 814]. OSS projects can therefore be seen as
socio-technical systems.

Adopting a socio-technical view on POSSE, we conceptualize the socio-technical
dynamics in POSSE by taking various relations between the social actors (i.e.,
developers) and technical artifacts (i.e., platform and modules) into account.
By taking the social and technical network into account, various interactions
between actors and artifacts are feasible, and potentially influence the
evolutionary dynamics of the ecosystem. Whereby the social network consists of
actor-actor relations and the technical network of artifact-artifact relations,
we also consider actor-artefact relations between both networks. The relations
of our conceptual socio-technical model of POSSE are shown in Figure 1. In this
study, we treat the platform (i.e., the codebase of Angular, React, or Vue) as a
black box, hence, we do not investigate the internal structure and modules of
the platform. The focus of this study is on the interdependencies of the modules
contributed by third-party developers to the platform’s ecosystem.

// PUT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE

In sum, POSSE are the intersection of effects relating to digital platforms,
ecosystems, and OSS. This intersection, combined with the effects emerging from
the intertwined relationship of social and technical aspects, are uncharted
territory. By following the call of @Winter2014 to rethink socio-technical
systems based on digitally-induced changes, we aim at revealing the combination
of the underlying social and technical forces in POSSE. The conclusions drawn
from our results, will help in structuring, managing, and growing POSSE, based
on our identification of patterns and drivers in successful POSSE. Ultimately,
our study will positively affect the success and popularity of POSSE.
