# Expected Contribution

This study proposes a data-driven approach to uncover socio-technical dynamics
in POSSE. Thereby, we expect to contribute to the research on digital ecosystems
as well as open source software as follows. Having insight into how social and
technical networks are interconnected reveals interdependencies and allows for
conclusions on who drives which aspects in the development, evolution, and
growth of POSSE. Being able to explain why socio-technical dynamics lead to
differences in growth and evolution enables actors (e.g., platform owner,
developers) participating in such ecosystems to take corrective actions. In
addition, we contribute to the growing stream of research analyzing digital
platforms and their ecosystems by proposing a methodological approach for
analyzing the socio-technical dynamics of these phenomena using digital trace
data, responding to the call for more data-driven approaches to investigate
ecosystem dynamics [@deReuver2018]. Further, our research offers an avenue for
future research to investigate the evolution of POSSE in more detail. Since
firms are increasingly choosing “orchestration over production” when it comes to
software code [@Parker2017], we contribute to research on a growing phenomenon.
Given the increasing shift towards open source models in software development
and the benefits of platform-based architectures, insights on the factors
influencing their success, evolvability, and ability to create innovative
outcomes can help researchers and practitioners alike to increase the
understanding of this phenomenon.
