# Discussion

## Risks and Challenges

Regarding risks and challenges for the described research project, we identified
three main areas: technical challenges, analytical challenges, and challenges
for contribution.

First, as we have a completed the programming of a data crawler, we only see one
technical challenge. As GitHub is throttling and limiting requests to their API,
we cannot download all the data we need in a single request or as fast as our
Internet connection would allow. While this might be annoying, it is not a
threat to the research project -- it clearly delays the completion date of this
research project, but does not threaten the success in general. Further, it is
technically possible to use modules without downloading releases via npm by
downloading the source code directly from GitHub. However, this is unlikely to
occur often due to the ease-of-use and added benefits (e.g., automatic updates
of dependencies) by using npm.

Second, and related to the first challenge, we expect the collected data set to
be decently large -- both in terms of database rows, due to the amount of
releases and commits, and in terms of size (i.e., gigabytes), due to the
included textual descriptors. The size of the data set is a challenge as it is
more difficult to handle during analysis. However, as only limited manual
analysis is needed (see section "Data Analysis") and as computational resources
are available to us, we do not expect the size of the dataset to threaten the
success of this research project. Similar to the previous challenge, we---at
worst---only expect a delay.

Third, we see challenges for our contribution. Without a qualitative analysis,
meaning has to be derived by application of extant theories. We cannot rely on
context-giving clues as can be done with qualitative approaches. Depending on
our findings---for instance, if we cannot explain a finding---we might only be
able to report some findings, without providing reasons or explanations.
However, this may provide also a source for future contributions and in-depth
studies.

## Expected Contribution

Based on the above described approach, we expect to contribute to the research
on POSSE as follows: having insight into how social and technical networks
(i.e., collaborators and dependencies) are interconnected, reveals
interdependencies and enables conclusions on who drives which aspects in the
development in and ultimately the growth of POSSE. Being able to explain why
some ecosystems are more successful or are growing faster than others, based on
the social and technical networks underlying these ecosystems, enables
developers of such ecosystems to take corrective actions. In addition, we
contribute to the growing stream of research analyzing digital platforms and
their ecosystems by proposing a methdological approach for analyzing the
socio-technical nature of these phenomenons using digital trace data. Further,
this insight creates an avenue for future research, explaining in more detail,
how such more successful networks can be created and maintained. Since firms are
increasingly choosing "orchestration over production" when it comes to software
code [@Parker2017], we contribute to research on a growing phenomenon.
